docs/writing-fusing-functions.md, before:

# Writing fusing functions
## Church encoding
Church Encoding is a way to encode common datatypes as λ-calculus terms. For example, here is a [Church-encoded](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_encoding) boolean type in HVM
```rs
true = λt λf t
false = λt λf f
```
Matching on values of this representation is simply calling the boolean value with what the function should return if the boolean is true and if the boolean is false.
```rs
if boolean case_true case_false = (boolean case_true case_false)
main = (if true 42 37)
// Outputs 42

// Or alternatively:
// if boolean = boolean
// Each boolean is represented by its own matching function
// so (true 42 37) will do the same thing.
```

This is how  a`Not` function that acts on this encoding can be defined
```rs
not = λboolean (boolean false true)
main = (not true) // Outputs λtλf f.
main = (not false) // Outputs λtλf t.
```
If the boolean is `true`, then the function will return `false`. If it is `false`, it will return `true`.

## Self-application

What happens if we self-compose the `not` function? It is a well known fact that`(not (not x)) == x`, so we should expect something that behaves like the identity function.
```rs
main = λx (not (not x))
// Output:
// λa (a λ* λb b λc λ* c λ* λd d λe λ* e)
```
The self-application of `not` outputs a large term. Testing will show that the term does indeed behave like an identity function. However, since the self-application of `not` is larger than `not` itself, if we self-compose this function many times, our program will get really slow and eat up a lot of memory, despite all functions being equivalent to the identity function:
```rs
main = λx (not (not x)) // Long
main = λx (not (not (not (not x)))) // Longer
main = λx (not (not (not (not (not (not (not (not x)))))))) // Longer
// etc...
```
The self-application of not a large number of times, such as 65536 or 4294967296, will be large enough to slow down our computer by a significant amount.

Luckily, there's a trick we can do to make the self-application of `not` much shorter. The trick is to rewrite `not` in another way that makes the self-composition of `not` much smaller. This trick is called "fusing". Here is how it's done.

### Fusing functions
Let's first take our initial `not` implementation.
```rs
not = λboolean (boolean false true)
```
We begin by replacing `false` and `true` by their values.
```rs
not = λboolean (boolean λtλf(f) λtλf(t))
```
After doing this, it's easy to notice that there's something that both terms have in common. Both of them are lambdas that take in two arguments. We can **lift** the lambda arguments up and make them **shared** between both cases.
```rs
not = λbooleanλtλf (boolean f t)
```
Let's see how the self-application of `not` gets reduced now. Each line will be a step in the reduction.
```rs
main = λx (not (not x))
main = λx (not (λbooleanλtλf (boolean f t) x))
main = λx (not (λtλf (boolean x f t)))
main = λx (λboolean1λt1λf1 (boolean1 f1 t1) (λtλf (boolean x f t)))
main = λxλt1λf1 (λtλf (x f t) f1 t1)
main = λxλt1λf1 (λf (x f f1) t1))
main = λxλt1λf1 (x t1 f1)
```
Wow! Simply by replacing lambda arguments with the values applied to them, we were able to make `(not (not x))` not grow in size. This is what fusing means, and it's a really powerful tool to make programs faster.

Fusing isn't only for Church-encoded `not`. Fusing can be done anywhere where efficient composition is important. What we simply have to do is "lift" lambdas up, and make the arguments "shared" between all cases.

## Preventing duplication

Something else that is important when writing fusing functions is linearizing variables to prevent useless duplication.

Consider the [scott-encoded](https://crypto.stanford.edu/~blynn/compiler/scott.html) type `Nat`:

```rs
zero = λs λz z // 0 as a scott-encoded number
succ = λpred λs λz (s pred) // Creates a Scott number out of its predecessor

two = (succ (succ zero)) // λs λz (s λs λz (s λs λz z))
```

We can write an addition function for this type, that adds two numbers

```rs
add = λa λb
	let case_succ = λa_pred (succ (add a_pred b)) // If a = p+1, then return (p+b)+1
	let case_zero = b // If the `a = 0`, return `b`
	(a case_succ case_zero)
```

This code seems fine, but it has a problem that makes it suboptimal. There is an implicit [duplication](dups-and-sups.md) here:

```rs
add = λa λb
	let {b1 b2} = b;
	let case_succ = λa_pred (succ (add a_pred b0))
	let case_zero = b1
	(a case_succ case_zero)
```

However, only one of the two duplicated values is ever used. The other one is discarded. This means that this duplication is completely useless! It makes this function suboptimal. In fact, as of commit `ebd469`, it will hang HVM, because it's recursive and HVM2 is eager.

The correct way to define this function is this, which pushes the duplicating lambdas down, and removes the duplication:

```rs
fusing_add = λa
	let case_succ = λa_pred λb (succ (fusing_add a_pred b))
	let case_zero = λb b
	(a case_succ case_zero)
```

This function is fusing on `a`, which means that `λx (fusing_add two x)` will have a small normal form (but `λx (fusing_add x two)` won't)

Broadly speaking, a good rule of thumb in HVM is **push linear lambdas to the top and duplicating lambdas to the bottom**.

## Example

To show the power of fusing, here is a program that self-composes `fusing_not` 2^512 times and prints the result. `2^512` is larger than amount of atoms in the observable universe, and yet HVM is still able to work with it due to its optimal sharing capabilities.

This program uses [native numbers, which are described here](native-numbers.md).
```rs
true = λt λf t
false = λt λf f
not = λboolean (boolean false true)
fusing_not = λboolean λt λf (boolean f t)
// Creates a Church numeral out of a native number
to_church n = switch n {
	0: λf λx x
	_: λf λx (f (to_church n-1 f x))
}
main =
	let two = λf λx (f (f x))
	let two_pow_512 = ((to_church 512) two) // Composition of church-encoded numbers is equivalent to exponentiation.
	// Self-composes `not` 2^512 times and prints the result.
	(two_pow_512 fusing_not)  // try replacing this by regular not. Will it still work?
```
Here is the program's output:
```bash
$ hvml run -s fuse_magic.hvm
λa λb λc (a b c)

RWTS   : 15374
- ANNI : 8193
- COMM : 5116
- ERAS : 521
- DREF : 1031
- OPER : 513
TIME   : 0.002 s
RPS    : 9.537 m
```
Only 15374 rewrites! Fusing is really powerful.

Commit message:

[sc-630] Rename the crate to bend and update docs for it

docs/writing-fusing-functions.md, after:

# Writing fusing functions
## Church encoding
Church Encoding is a way to encode common datatypes as λ-calculus terms. For example, here is a [Church-encoded](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_encoding) boolean type in HVM
```rs
true = λt λf t
false = λt λf f
```
Matching on values of this representation is simply calling the boolean value with what the function should return if the boolean is true and if the boolean is false.
```rs
if boolean case_true case_false = (boolean case_true case_false)
main = (if true 42 37)
// Outputs 42

// Or alternatively:
// if boolean = boolean
// Each boolean is represented by its own matching function
// so (true 42 37) will do the same thing.
```

This is how a `Not` function that acts on this encoding can be defined
```rs
not = λboolean (boolean false true)
main = (not true) // Outputs λtλf f.
main = (not false) // Outputs λtλf t.
```
If the boolean is `true`, then the function will return `false`. If it is `false`, it will return `true`.

## Self-application

What happens if we self-compose the `not` function? It is a well known fact that`(not (not x)) == x`, so we should expect something that behaves like the identity function.
```rs
main = λx (not (not x))
// Output:
// λa (a λ* λb b λc λ* c λ* λd d λe λ* e)
```
The self-application of `not` outputs a large term. Testing will show that the term does indeed behave like an identity function. However, since the self-application of `not` is larger than `not` itself, if we self-compose this function many times, our program will get really slow and eat up a lot of memory, despite all functions being equivalent to the identity function:
```rs
main = λx (not (not x)) // Long
main = λx (not (not (not (not x)))) // Longer
main = λx (not (not (not (not (not (not (not (not x)))))))) // Longer
// etc...
```
The self-application of not a large number of times, such as 65536 or 4294967296, will be large enough to slow down our computer by a significant amount.

Luckily, there's a trick we can do to make the self-application of `not` much shorter. The trick is to rewrite `not` in another way that makes the self-composition of `not` much smaller. This trick is called "fusing". Here is how it's done.

### Fusing functions
Let's first take our initial `not` implementation.
```rs
not = λboolean (boolean false true)
```
We begin by replacing `false` and `true` by their values.
```rs
not = λboolean (boolean λtλf(f) λtλf(t))
```
After doing this, it's easy to notice that there's something that both terms have in common. Both of them are lambdas that take in two arguments. We can **lift** the lambda arguments up and make them **shared** between both cases.
```rs
not = λbooleanλtλf (boolean f t)
```
Let's see how the self-application of `not` gets reduced now. Each line will be a step in the reduction.
```rs
main = λx (not (not x))
main = λx (not (λbooleanλtλf (boolean f t) x))
main = λx (not (λtλf (boolean x f t)))
main = λx (λboolean1λt1λf1 (boolean1 f1 t1) (λtλf (boolean x f t)))
main = λxλt1λf1 (λtλf (x f t) f1 t1)
main = λxλt1λf1 (λf (x f f1) t1))
main = λxλt1λf1 (x t1 f1)
```
Wow! Simply by replacing lambda arguments with the values applied to them, we were able to make `(not (not x))` not grow in size. This is what fusing means, and it's a really powerful tool to make programs faster.

Fusing isn't only for Church-encoded `not`. Fusing can be done anywhere where efficient composition is important. What we simply have to do is "lift" lambdas up, and make the arguments "shared" between all cases.

## Preventing duplication

Something else that is important when writing fusing functions is linearizing variables to prevent useless duplication.

Consider the [scott-encoded](https://crypto.stanford.edu/~blynn/compiler/scott.html) type `Nat`:

```rs
zero = λs λz z // 0 as a scott-encoded number
succ = λpred λs λz (s pred) // Creates a Scott number out of its predecessor

two = (succ (succ zero)) // λs λz (s λs λz (s λs λz z))
```

We can write an addition function for this type, that adds two numbers

```rs
add = λa λb
	let case_succ = λa_pred (succ (add a_pred b)) // If a = p+1, then return (p+b)+1
	let case_zero = b // If the `a = 0`, return `b`
	(a case_succ case_zero)
```

This code seems fine, but it has a problem that makes it suboptimal. There is an implicit [duplication](dups-and-sups.md) here:

```rs
add = λa λb
	let {b1 b2} = b;
	let case_succ = λa_pred (succ (add a_pred b0))
	let case_zero = b1
	(a case_succ case_zero)
```

However, only one of the two duplicated values is ever used. The other one is discarded. This means that this duplication is completely useless! It makes this function suboptimal. In fact, as of commit `ebd469`, it will hang HVM, because it's recursive and HVM2 is eager.

The correct way to define this function is this, which pushes the duplicating lambdas down, and removes the duplication:

```rs
fusing_add = λa
	let case_succ = λa_pred λb (succ (fusing_add a_pred b))
	let case_zero = λb b
	(a case_succ case_zero)
```

This function is fusing on `a`, which means that `λx (fusing_add two x)` will have a small normal form (but `λx (fusing_add x two)` won't)

Broadly speaking, a good rule of thumb in HVM is **push linear lambdas to the top and duplicating lambdas to the bottom**.

## Example

To show the power of fusing, here is a program that self-composes `fusing_not` 2^24 times and prints the result.
Currently hvm is not able to handle operations between church numbers so we explicitly convert the native number to a church number in this example (which is very slow).

This program uses [native numbers, which are described here](native-numbers.md).
```rs
true = λt λf t
false = λt λf f

not = λboolean (boolean false true)

fusing_not = λboolean λt λf (boolean f t)

// Creates a Church numeral out of a native number
to_church n = switch n {
	0: λf λx x
	_: λf λx (f (to_church n-1 f x))
}

main =
	((to_church 0xFFFFFF) fusing_not)  // try replacing this by regular not. Will it still work?
```
Here is the program's output:
```bash
$ bend norm -s fuse_magic.hvm
Result: λa λb λc (a c b)
- ITRS: 285212661
- TIME: 5.67s
- MIPS: 50.28
```
A lot of rewrites, but most of those are just to create the church number.
